1IntroductionCardiovascular disease, including heart disease and stroke, is the leading cause of death in the US and in most of the world (Javed et al., 2022). Social conditions such as education and income are among the strongest determinants of cardiovascular health (CVH), and a large literature has focused on the effects of neighborhood conditions on CVH (Joynt Maddox et al., 2024; Martin et al., 2025). The role of neighborhoods in shaping CVH-related behaviors, such as diet and physical activity among children, is of particular concern given the growing prevalence of obesity and the condition's link to later-life cardiovascular disease (Jacobs et al., 2022; Li et al., 2003). The origins of adult cardiovascular disease have been linked to social and environmental conditions stretching back to in-utero and early life (Erqou et al., 2017; Paneth & Susser, 1995), in part through epigenetic modification such as DNA methylation (Bush et al., 2018; Kim et al., 2023; Mitchell et al., 2016; Notterman & Mitchell, 2015).While many studies have identified early-life family socioeconomic conditions as a risk factor for adult disease (Galobardes et al., 2006; Havranek et al., 2015; Pollitt et al., 2005), the life-course implications of childhood neighborhood environment remain poorly understood due to the scarcity of longitudinal datasets with high-quality measures of CVH and neighborhood context. This article fills a knowledge gap by linking early-life neighborhood conditions to CVH using the Future of Families Cardiovascular Health Among Young Adults (FF-CHAYA) Study. Based on the rich contextual and health variables in these data, we test the association between neighborhood environment in infancy and childhood to CVH in early adulthood based on a quantified set of eight factors formally defined by the American Heart Association in 2022 (Lloyd-Jones et al., 2022).This study contributes to existing research in three ways. First, we investigate the link between neighborhoods during potentially sensitive periods in the life course—infancy and mid-childhood—and CVH more than a decade later in young adulthood. The Future of Families Child Wellbeing Study (FFCWS) has followed a cohort born between 1998 and 2000, obtaining extensive information on their contextual environments, with a subsample of the cohort participating in FF-CHAYA and providing detailed health data about 23 years later. Second, we examine a comprehensive set of CVH-related behaviors and clinical metrics, many of which are directly measured rather than self-reported. Direct measurement of the clinical features of CVH is critical for studying the progression and risks of cardiovascular disease in a young population, where overt symptoms and disease diagnoses are relatively uncommon. Third, the FFCWS cohort was recruited from 20 US metropolitan areas. This wide geographic coverage expands upon prior survey work on neighborhoods and CVH, which was primarily limited to a single region or a small number of study sites. Furthermore, the FFCWS data were oversampled for births to never-married mothers, allowing an analysis of the life-course trajectories of relatively disadvantaged families.2Background and literature reviewA large literature in the US and elsewhere has investigated the associations of neighborhood environments with CVH, independent of individual risk factors such as income, education, and race/ethnicity (Kawachi & Berkman, 2003; Pickett & Pearl, 2001; Van Lenthe & Mackenbach, 2006). Neighborhood influences on cardiovascular risk factors are believed to operate through many potential pathways, including both physical and social characteristics of the local environment. Living in a place with compromised air quality has been linked to a greater incidence of coronary heart disease (Kan et al., 2008), and lack of walkable spaces and access to healthy foods are associated with poor diet and low physical activity (Mujahid et al., 2008; Roscoe et al., 2022). Exposures to crime and neighborhood disorder are thought to induce stress, which exacerbates a wide range of pathologies related to cardiovascular disease, including unhealthy coping behaviors such as smoking and physical inactivity (Kivimäki and Steptoe, 2018; Yu & Lippert, 2016). Indirectly, neighborhoods with few opportunities for education and employment can limit residents’ socioeconomic resources, which, in turn, determine access to health care and CVH-related behaviors (Chaix, 2009; Diez Roux et al., 2008; Fullin et al., 2023; Kershaw et al., 2024; Merkin et al., 2009).In recent years, researchers have made important contributions to our understanding of these linkages between neighborhoods and CVH via cross-sectional and longitudinal surveys. The Multi-Ethnic Study of Atherosclerosis Neighborhood (MESA), a longitudinal study initiated in 2000, has been a particularly rich source of information for examining neighborhood influences on both cardiovascular risk and incident cardiovascular events (Diez Roux et al., 2016; Merkin et al., 2020; Xiao & Graham, 2019). MESA interviews included both self-reported health behaviors and clinical assessments to track CVH over two decades. Additional analyses of the associations between neighborhoods and CVH in the US are based on well-established surveys such as the Jackson Heart Study, the Atherosclerosis Risk in Community Study (ARIC), the Midlife in the United States Study (MIDUS), and the Coronary Artery Risk Development in Young Adults (CARDIA) Study (see, for example, Boylan and Robert (2017), Diez Roux (2001), Foraker et al. (2019), Nordstrom et al. (2004), Shishehbor et al. (2008), and Lloyd-Jones et al. (2021)). Despite the plethora of research generated from these surveys, there have been notable data limitations pertaining to the components of CVH collected, the age distributions of the samples, the time period of data collection, and the generalizability of study sites.First, most empirical studies on neighborhoods and CVH have focused on obesity or on its main underlying mechanisms, namely diet and physical activity, rather than on a broader set of established cardiovascular risks (see Tamura et al. (2019) for a review).Second, most of the data sources rely on contextual data from samples of middle-aged or older adults – despite emerging views that CVH may be more sensitive to circumstances during critical periods of the life course, notably infancy and childhood (Jimenez et al., 2019). For example, the MESA cohort was aged 45-84 at the start of the study, and the findings are limited to the determinants of CVH during later adulthood. The Jackson Heart Study, the Atherosclerosis Risk in Community Study (ARIC), and the Midlife in the United States Study are similarly restricted to middle-aged or older adults. Although CARDIA focused on younger adults (18-30 at the start of the survey) to examine the association between neighborhood environments, CVH-related risk factors, and early development of cardiovascular disease, the survey did not collect information on their neighborhood conditions during early life. Moreover, the CARDIA data reflect a third concern: individuals in the CARDIA cohort, who were recruited in 1985-86, did not grow up in the obesogenic environment characterizing the most recent decades. Fourth, the geographic generalizability of these surveys is limited. Each of these surveys recruited participants from a small number of research sites: MESA recruited from six sites, ARIC and CARDIA from four, and the Jackson Heart Study recruited participants from three counties in Jackson, MI. Finally, most – but not all – of the resulting analyses rely on cross-sectional measures of neighborhoods that fail to account for changes in residence during the period of analysis (Alter et al., 2024; Jimenez et al., 2019).The data that we analyze here largely overcome these limitations. FFCWS, the parent study of FF-CHAYA, follows a birth cohort that grew up during a period when childhood obesity became increasingly common, particularly among those who identify as Black, Hispanic, multiracial, or American Indian/Alaska Native (Joynt Maddox et al., 2024; Tsoi et al., 2022). The detailed CVH-focused health measures obtained in FF-CHAYA allow for the examination of behavioral and clinical markers of cardiovascular disease among a young adult population. In addition, the sample's large geographic coverage permits generalization of its findings to a relatively broad urban population.Leveraging the longitudinal structure of our data from birth to young adulthood, we address three research questions. First, are the neighborhood conditions at birth and mid-childhood associated with CVH in young adulthood, independent of individual sociodemographic factors? A recent analysis of data from FF-CHAYA identified substantial social and economic disparities in CVH among young adults (Goldman et al., 2026). In light of the many potential mechanisms summarized above through which neighborhoods can affect CVH beyond individual and family characteristics, we anticipate that we will find significant negative effects on CVH among those in disadvantaged neighborhoods.Second, we examine how changing neighborhood conditions between birth and age nine are related to CVH. To the extent that neighborhood disadvantage reveals an association with suboptimal CVH, it may primarily be the result of neighborhood influences close to the time of birth – i.e., many scholars have shown that exposures during the fetal period and infancy have significant effects on cardiovascular health among adults (Barker, 2004; Barker et al., 1989; Gillman, 2010). However, it is plausible that the impacts of neighborhood are also substantial in later childhood, i.e., potentially operating through much of the first decade of life or longer. This latter hypothesis is consistent with the idea of “cumulative disadvantage” for cardiovascular health (Jimenez et al., 2019). Below, we explore whether linkages between disadvantaged neighborhoods and poor CVH are concentrated close to the time of birth or appear to be present later in childhood as well.Our third objective is to identify the specific components of CVH that are most strongly associated with neighborhood conditions. In a recent study of a cohort followed from early childhood to late adolescence, researchers determined that CVH began to decline as early as age 10, and that the decline was associated with health behaviors rather than health factors (Aris et al., 2025). In addition, earlier studies have pointed to links between disadvantaged neighborhoods and lower dietary quality (e.g., more fast food consumption) and lower levels of regular physical activity among children and adolescents (Keita et al., 2009; Kim and Cubbin, 2020). In light of this research, we anticipate that measures pertaining to poor diet and low levels of physical activity, and perhaps obesity, are the CVH components most likely to be associated with disadvantaged childhood neighborhoods. Health conditions such as hypertension, hyperlipidemia, and high glucose levels evolve slowly and the impact of social, economic and environmental conditions on these measures may not be evident until ages beyond those in our young adult cohort.3DataFF-CHAYA is a recent demographic, clinical, and molecular data collection effort fielded between September 2021 and December 2023. The study is designed to examine the social determinants of cardiovascular health and subclinical cardiovascular disease among young adults, as well as potential mediation by DNA methylation (Lloyd-Jones et al., 2025a).The sample for FF-CHAYA comprises participants in the FFCWS. FFCWS is a longitudinal survey of births that began with interviews of about 5000 mothers who gave birth during the period 1998 to 2000 in 20 US cities with a population of at least 200,000 (Reichman et al., 2001). To date, there have been seven waves of FFCWS: baseline (child's birth) and when the children were ages 1, 3, 5, 9, 15 and 22 (https://ffcws.princeton.edu/about). The seventh wave of FFCWS (referred to as Y22) took place during 2020-2023, when the focal child was about age 22. After this interview, participants were invited to attend “pop-up” clinics that were set up in the original FFCWS cities as well as several nearby locations, most often in hotel ballrooms. A given city typically had one or two clinic visits during the fieldwork period, each lasting two or three days. A total of 2507 young adults were eligible and invited to participate in the clinics. Among these, 1857 scheduled a clinic appointment and 1421 attended the clinics. The overall clinic participation rate was 56.7% of those eligible. FF-CHAYA participants show similar characteristics to participants in Y22 of FFCWS that did not take part in FF-CHAYA: FF-CHAYA participants are slightly more likely to be female and to be Black and to have lower incomes than non-participants (Goldman et al., 2026). The 1421 young adults participated in 33 clinics in 22 metropolitan areas between 2021 and 2023. On average, the clinic visits took place nine months after the Y22 FFCWS interview. Because of an oversampling of births to never-married couples at baseline in FFCWS, children from poor families and Black children were overrepresented at Y22 of FFCWS and in FF-CHAYA.After providing informed consent at the clinic visit and watching a short video describing the study, participants completed a series of self-administered questionnaires on iPads about their medical history, current health status, and health-related behaviors (diet, exercise, drinking, smoking, and prescription medications). They subsequently underwent blood pressure measurement; anthropometry measurement (height, weight, and waist and hip circumference); and phlebotomy (e.g., lipid panel, metabolic panel, complete blood count, hemoglobin A1c, high-sensitivity C-reactive protein and other inflammatory markers, COVID-19 antibodies, and epigenetic markers (DNA methylation)). Participants also received an ultrasound scan of the carotid artery, performed by one of two experienced research sonographers, to detect early arterial injury and accelerated atherosclerosis via measures of intima-media thickening and carotid artery distensibility that are strongly predictive of future atherosclerotic disease. On average, the clinic visits lasted for about 2 h. Details of the data collection are described in Lloyd-Jones et al. (2025a).4Methods4.1Outcome and explanatory variablesOur key outcome variable is a measure of CVH developed by the American Heart Association to encompass cardiovascular disease prevention and health promotion. This measure, known as Life's Essential 8, “LE8,” was developed in 2022 and comprises eight metrics — diet, physical activity, nicotine exposure, sleep, body mass index, blood lipids, blood glucose and blood pressure (Lloyd-Jones et al., 2022). Each metric has a scoring algorithm ranging from 0 to 100 to cover the spectrum of possible values ranging from least to most healthy; the overall LE8 score is the unweighted average of these eight metrics and thus also ranges from 0 to 100, with higher values on the LE8 score and the subscores indicating better cardiovascular health (i.e., better health-related behaviors or clinical measurements). Information for calculating seven of these metrics is obtained from standardized protocols for clinical measures and from validated questionnaire items obtained during the FF-CHAYA clinic visit, as described in more detail in Table 1. The eighth metric (sleep) is derived from responses to the FFCWS core questionnaire at Y22, based on the average duration of sleep during work/school days and non-work/non-school days. A total of 1183 young adults have complete LE8 scores. For the remainder of this paper, we refer to the LE8 score as the CVH score and the eight metrics as (CVH) subscores.Table 1Eight cardiovascular health (CVH) metrics from the Fragile Families Cardiovascular Health Among Young Adults (FF-CHAYA) Study, 2021-2023.Table 1MetricDescriptionBehavioralDietInformation was based on the Dietary Screener Questionnaire from the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES). Questions pertain to the frequency of consumption of selected foods and beverages in the last month. The CVH metric (0-100) focuses on adequate intakes of fruits and vegetables, fiber, whole grains, dairy, calcium, and limited intake of sugar-sweetened beverages, with values categorized into quintiles.Physical ActivityInformation was based on the PAQ-K questionnaire, used by NHANES and other studies. The CVH metric (0-100) is based on minutes per week of moderate and vigorous physical activity.SleepInformation was based on reported bedtimes and wake times in the FFCWS core questionnaire at Y22. The CVH metric (0-100) is calculated as (school/work sleep duration×5 + non-school/non-work duration×2)/7).Nicotine ExposureThe CVH metric (0-100) is based on use of cigarettes during the past 30 days, the use of e-cigarettes and other tobacco products in the last week, and hours of secondhand exposure within the household.ClinicalBlood GlucoseThe CVH metric (0-100) is based on the measure of hemoglobin A1C and self-reported diagnosis of diabetes.Blood LipidsThe CVH metric (0-100) is based on non-HDL cholesterol levels obtained from non-fasting venous blood (plasma).Blood PressureThe CVH metric (0-100) is based on the average of diastolic and systolic blood pressures (average of the second and third readings for each), along with the use of antihypertensive medication.Body Mass Index (BMI)The CVH metric (0-100) is based on the BMI (weight in kilograms divided by the square of the height in meters), obtained from directly measured height (calibrated stadiometers) and weight (electronic scales), with participants wearing light clothing and no shoes.Explanatory variables in models of the CVH score and its components include several demographic measures of the young adults: age (21 to 25); sex (male, female); race/ethnicity (White, Black, Hispanic, Other), and completed years of schooling. Classification of race is based on responses to a question on racial identity and a question on Hispanic/Latino origin asked of young adults in Y22 of FFCWS. The racial/ethnic distribution for the 1421 young adults in FF-CHAYA is as follows: 17.1% non-Hispanic White (hereafter White), 51.4% non-Hispanic Black (hereafter Black), 27.3% Hispanic, and 4.2% Other. After excluding only one person with missing values, the sample size is reduced to 1182, which comprises 99% of those with a complete CVH score and 83% of those who participated in the clinic visit.The analysis also includes characteristics of the area of residence of the young adults at about the time of birth and age nine. As described below, these contextual variables, based mostly on census tracts, are analyzed in the form of latent classes. A total of 19 contextual variables linked with residence of the child at ages 0 and 9 in FFCWS are included, reflecting a wide range of characteristics of the area: income and poverty levels; education; housing; racial/ethnic composition and segregation; occupation and employment; crime; and female-headed households. Six of the variables are based on counties; these measures were not available at the census-tract level. Contextual variables, all of which come from the 2000 U.S. Census (data.census.gov) or Opportunity Insights (https://opportunityinsights.org/neighborhoods/), are presented in Appendix Table 1 and pertain to the year 2000.4.2Analytic strategyWe identified neighborhood archetypes using latent transition analysis (LTA), an extension of latent class analysis (LCA) that uses longitudinal data to include movement between classes over time (Abarda et al., 2020; Collins and Lanza, 2009; Nylund-Gibson et al., 2023). LCA is a statistical technique, specifically a finite mixture model, that identifies a modest number of qualitatively different unobserved groups or classes within the total sample based on a potentially large set of shared observed measures that are typically intercorrelated (Weller et al., 2020). LCA assumes identified classes to be static. By contrast, LTA identifies latent classes at multiple points in time and estimates the transition probabilities between those classes. In this paper, we employ LTA to define several distinct classes at each of two time points (birth and age 9) based on 19 census tract or county-level contextual variables. Our objective is to use this rich set of variables to provide a small number of distinct and meaningful profiles of geographic areas while accounting for the movement of some individuals across geographic profiles during childhood.We estimated the model using the LMest package in R, based on a basic latent Markov model, with the set of classes held constant at the two time points (Bartolucci et al., 2017). We dichotomized the 19 contextual variables (shown in Appendix Table 1) at the median prior to estimation, with variables assigned the value 1 in the direction (above or below the median) that, for most of the variables, denotes higher vulnerability or risk for health outcomes including CVH (e.g., higher poverty and unemployment, lower education, a higher proportion of minorities). We estimated LTA models on the full FFCWS sample of 4629 respondents to obtain robust estimates and the optimal number of the latent classes. As is typically recommended, we based the decision regarding the optimal number of classes on both calculated measures (e.g., AIC and BIC, which provide assessments of model fit, and entropy, which measures the extent of separation of the latent classes) and parsimony. In light of the result that some metrics supported a four-class model whereas others favored three classes, we chose a three-class model for reasons of parsimony and interpretability. A four-class model would have created 16 (4x4) possible classes with the inclusion of transitions between the classes, and some cells would have had zero observations.After estimation, we assigned individuals to one of the three classes at each time point based on their highest predicted probability of being in each class (derived from their measurements on the contextual variables). This procedure generated three classes of “stayers” (those who were in the same class at both time points) and six classes of “movers” (those who changed classes between birth and age nine). Note that a stayer may have moved to a census tract/county with the same (or very similar) characteristics. Due to small sample sizes, we reduced the total number of classes from nine to eight by combining moves between the Disadvantaged and Most Disadvantaged neighborhoods in both directions. Because the contextual data are based on the year 2000, changes over time in the characteristics of a census tract/county (e.g., an increase in poverty) are not reflected in these data.We subsequently fit three linear regression models on the 1182 respondents with complete information on the CVH score and predictors. The first model includes only the individual variables, whereas the second model includes only the latent classes (movers and stayers). The third model combines both sets of variables. We then estimated the second (unadjusted) and third (adjusted) models separately for each of the eight CVH subscores to examine how neighborhoods are differentially associated with the components of cardiovascular health.5Results5.1Latent transition analysis (LTA) of neighborhood characteristicsFig. 1 presents the composition of the three latent classes identified through LTA conducted on the FFCWS sample of young adults (N = 4629). The numerical values used in the figure are in the last three columns of Appendix Table 1. Higher values for each contextual variable (depicted as larger protrusions in the figure) indicate a greater probability that a respondent in the latent class is in the half of the distribution of the contextual variable associated with higher vulnerability to CVH (i.e., that the respondent has a value of 1 on the binary contextual variable). In subsequent sections, we sometimes refer to the three latent classes as neighborhood archetypes or simply neighborhoods for convenience, although we recognize that the geographical areas underlying the data are considerably larger than what many people would refer to as neighborhoods.Fig. 1Radar charts of neighborhood archetypes identified by latent class analysis on contextual variables. Larger values indicate a greater probability that individuals in the given archetype (Advantaged, Disadvantaged, and Most Disadvantaged) are in the half of the distribution of the contextual variable associated with greater CVH vulnerability (e.g., higher poverty, lower education).Note: Detailed descriptions of the contextual variables and the associated probabilities by archetype are available in Appendix Table 1.The values in Fig. 1 indicate that the “Advantaged” neighborhood has considerably more favorable socioeconomic characteristics than the other two neighborhoods: higher levels of schooling, higher employment, larger representation in the managerial and professional workforce, lower levels of public assistance, higher income and lower poverty, lower levels of vacant housing, lower crime, fewer female-headed households, lower student to teacher ratios, higher density of physicians, and lower levels of income inequality and racial segregation. The “Disadvantaged” neighborhood has considerably less favorable values on all of these characteristics than the Advantaged one, although not as extreme for several of them (income, female-headed households, vacant housing, and crime) as the “Most Disadvantaged” neighborhood. The distinctive features of the Disadvantaged and Most Disadvantaged neighborhoods pertain to race/ethnicity and immigrant status: the Disadvantaged neighborhood has much higher values for the proportion Hispanic and foreign-born than the other classes, whereas the Most Disadvantaged neighborhood has much higher values for the proportion Black, single-parent families, and the dissimilarity index pertaining to Black-White segregation.The predicted proportions of young adults in our analytic sample (N = 1182) assigned to these three latent classes at birth are roughly evenly divided across classes: 36.5%, 30.6%, and 32.8% for the Advantaged, Disadvantaged, and Most Disadvantaged neighborhoods, respectively. Fig. 2 shows the transition probabilities among the three neighborhood archetypes between birth and age nine, conditional on the starting neighborhood. About 79% remained in the same neighborhood archetype (i.e., “stayers”), and 21% moved to a different archetype (i.e., “movers”). Seventeen percent of young adults who were born in a Disadvantaged neighborhood and 21% of those born in a Most Disadvantaged neighborhood moved to an Advantaged neighborhood. Among young adults who were born in an Advantaged neighborhood, 8% and 11% moved to a Disadvantaged and Most Disadvantaged neighborhood, respectively. Moves between Disadvantaged and Most Disadvantaged neighborhoods were less common (23 people combined).Fig. 2Neighborhood transition probabilities between Year 0 and Year 9 (n = 1182).5.2Regression analysis relating neighborhood archetypes to CVH outcomesTable 2 presents descriptive statistics for the assigned neighborhood archetypes, individual sociodemographic characteristics, and CVH variables used in the regression models (analytical sample, N = 1182). The sample has more female than male young adults, and the racial/ethnic composition reflects the oversampling of Black and Hispanic mothers in FFCWS. The average age of the sample is 22.9 years. The average CVH score is 69.2 out of a possible 100 (higher scores indicate better CVH). Not surprisingly given the oversampling of disadvantaged families in FFCWS, this CVH score is below the average score of 74.9 obtained from a composite sample of six contemporary cohorts ages 20-39 in the US (Ning et al., 2024). The CVH subscores vary widely. Three of the four clinical subscores (blood glucose, blood lipids, and blood pressure) are above 80 on average, reflecting relatively good health. Behavioral subscores (diet, physical activity, sleep, and nicotine exposure) and body mass index, however, have lower average scores. Diet and physical activity metrics are lowest at 39.7 and 42.7 respectively.Table 2Descriptive characteristics of the analytical sample by eight neighborhood archetypes, stayers and movers between years 0 and 9.Table 2TotalAdvantaged (A), stayerDisadvantaged (D), stayerMost disadvantaged (MD), stayerA to D, moverA to MD, moverD to A, moverMD to A, moverBetween D and MD, moverN11823512713154635756623%100%30%23%27%4%3%6%6%2%Gender (percent) Male44.649.338.742.952.242.945.348.539.1 Female55.450.761.357.147.857.154.751.560.9Race/ethnicity (percent) White17.1454.82.58.717.114.77.60 Black51.424.532.591.126.174.330.786.482.6 Hispanic27.322.859.85.158.72.9484.517.4 Other4.27.731.36.55.76.71.50Age and education (mean) Age22.922.923.122.822.922.922.922.822.7 Years of schooling13.013.413.112.51312.813.312.812.9CVH scores (0-100) Overall CVH score69.272.768.266.47071.371.266.763 Subscore: diet39.744.536.838.632.732.140.537.143.7 Subscore: physical activity42.756.739.729.548.34448.838.821.7 Subscore: sleep77.681.577.572.677.481.777.380.673 Subscore: nicotine exposure68.267.870.965.365.886.972.366.147.8 Subscore: blood glucose94.696.694.593.195.793.794.190.998.3 Subscore: blood lipids85.983.984.988.390.481.186.984.892.2 Subscore: blood pressure83.482.684.38385.989.385.881.177.2 Subscore: body mass index61.86856.860.964.261.16454.149.8Individual characteristics and, to a lesser extent, CVH scores differ across neighborhood archetypes of stayers and movers. Young adults who were born in or moved to a Most Disadvantaged neighborhood are disproportionately Black (i.e., 91.1% of those who stayed in Most Disadvantaged neighborhoods were Black), and those who were born in or moved to a Disadvantaged neighborhood are more likely to be Hispanic than another race/ethnicity. Average CVH scores range from 63.0 among young adults who moved between Disadvantaged and Most Disadvantaged neighborhoods to 72.7 among those who stayed in Advantaged neighborhoods. Variability is largest for physical activity: movers between Disadvantaged and Most Disadvantaged neighborhoods have a physical activity score of 21.7 compared to 56.7 among stayers in Advantaged neighborhoods.Table 3 shows the estimated coefficients and confidence intervals from the three linear regression models that predict CVH scores: individual characteristics (Model 1), neighborhood archetypes (Model 2), and the combination of the two (Model 3). Variables reflecting the race/ethnicity and schooling of the young adults are significantly related to the overall CVH score (Model 1) with sizeable coefficients (p < 0.001): about four and five points lower than Whites for Hispanic and Black young adults, respectively, and about 2.8 points higher on the CVH score for each additional year of schooling. In Model 2, which includes only the neighborhood archetypes, stayers in the Disadvantaged and Most Disadvantaged neighborhoods and especially movers between these two neighborhoods (in either direction) have substantially and significantly (p < 0.001) lower CVH scores (by 4.5, 6.3, and 9.8 points, respectively) than stayers in the Advantaged neighborhood. Surprisingly, movers from the Most Disadvantaged to the Advantaged neighborhood have significantly lower CVH scores than those remaining in the Advantaged neighborhood (p < 0.001), but movers in the reverse direction do not. As expected, the coefficients for neighborhoods are substantially attenuated in the presence of the control variables in Model 3, but the CVH score for the movers between the Disadvantaged and Most Disadvantaged neighborhoods remains significantly lower by about 6.6 points than that for the stayers in Advantaged neighborhoods. Stayers in one of the disadvantaged archetypes and all but one of the classes of movers to or from a disadvantaged archetype have negative coefficients; however, with the exception of movers between the two disadvantaged archetypes, these coefficients are not statistically significant. The variables denoting race/ethnicity and schooling of the young adults remain significant and sizable in Model 3.Table 3Coefficients and 95% confidence intervals for linear regression models of the young adult CVH score.Table 3Model 1Model 2Model 3Number of participants118211821182Adjusted R-square0.130.040.13coef.95% CIcoef.95% CIcoef.95% CIGender Male (reference) Female−2.13∗∗[-3.55,-0.71]−2.01∗∗[-3.42,-0.59]Race/ethnicity White (reference) Black−4.75∗∗∗[-6.72,-2.79]−3.30∗∗[-5.61,-0.98] Hispanic−3.85∗∗∗[-5.98,-1.71]−2.81∗[-5.19,-0.43] Other−0.01[-3.76,3.74]0.33[-3.44,4.10]Age and education Age−0.34[-1.39,0.71]−0.44[-1.50,0.63] Years of schooling2.79∗∗∗[2.29,3.30]2.72∗∗∗[2.21,3.24]Neighborhood archetype Advantaged (A), stayer (reference group) Disadvantaged (D), stayer−4.53∗∗∗[-6.55,-2.52]−2.09[-4.24,0.06] Most Disadvantaged (MD), stayer−6.30∗∗∗[-8.23,-4.37]−2.11[-4.37,0.16] A to D, mover−2.67[-6.57,1.23]−0.68[-4.50,3.13] A to MD, mover−1.46[-5.87,2.95]1.37[-2.94,5.67] D to A, mover−1.5[-4.66,1.67]−0.35[-3.44,2.74] MD to A, mover−6.03∗∗∗[-9.37,-2.69]−2.87[-6.26,0.51] Between D and MD, mover−9.75∗∗∗[-15.11,-4.39]−6.55∗[-11.80,-1.30]∗p < 0.05, ∗∗p < 0.01, ∗∗∗p < 0.001.Fig. 3 show coefficients and 95% confidence intervals from Model 2 (unadjusted) and Model 3 (adjusted) estimated for each of the eight subscores; the subscores are separated into behavioral (Fig. 4) and clinical (Fig. 5) metrics. Coefficients and confidence intervals for these models are presented in Appendix Tables 2a through 2d. Because we are estimating many coefficients, we restrict our discussion to large and consistent findings that are discernible from the graphs.Fig. 3Coefficients and 95% confidence intervals representing associations between young adult CVH scores and childhood neighborhood archetypes, stayers and movers. Coefficients are based on Model 2 (unadjusted for sociodemographic factors) and Model 3 (adjusted for sociodemographic factors) in Table 3. Advantaged (A) stayers are the reference group. A: Advantaged, D: Disadvantaged, MD: Most disadvantaged.Fig. 4Coefficients and 95% confidence intervals representing associations between young adult cardiovascular health behaviors and childhood neighborhood archetypes, stayers and movers. Adjusted models include individual-level sociodemographic factors. Full model output is available in Appendix Tables 2a and 2b Advantaged (A) stayers are the reference group. A: Advantaged, D: Disadvantaged, MD: Most disadvantaged.Fig. 5Coefficients and 95% confidence intervals representing associations between young adult clinical cardiovascular health measures and childhood neighborhood archetypes, movers and stayers. Adjusted models include individual-level sociodemographic factors. Full model output is available in Appendix Tables 2c and 2d Advantaged (A) stayers are the reference group. A: Advantaged, D: Disadvantaged, MD: Most disadvantaged.Overall, statistically significant associations with the neighborhood archetypes are more frequent for CVH-related behaviors than for clinical measures. The largest coefficients (in absolute value) are those for physical activity: about 27 and 35 points lower for the Most Disadvantaged stayers and Disadvantaged-Most Disadvantaged movers respectively than for Advantaged stayers in the unadjusted model (p < 0.001), and 12 (p < 0.01) and 22 points (p < 0.05) lower respectively with the inclusion of control variables. Some of the latent class coefficients for diet and smoking also remain significant in adjusted models; these significant coefficients characterize stayers or movers that are associated with the Disadvantaged or the Most Disadvantaged neighborhood archetypes. In contrast, all but one of the significant coefficients associated with neighborhood movers and stayers in the models of clinical subscores lose their significance when individual sociodemographic factors are accounted for.The individual-level variables also have generally stronger associations with the behavioral subscores than the clinical subscores (Appendix Tables 2a through 2d). As with the latent classes, coefficients associated with race/ethnicity, gender, and schooling are generally largest for physical activity. Young adult schooling has a substantial and significant (p < 0.001) association with all four behavioral subscores: about 2.4 points higher per additional year of schooling for diet, three points higher for sleep, over five points higher for smoking, and almost eight points higher for physical activity.6ConclusionThe analysis underscores the relationships between childhood neighborhood conditions and CVH among young adults. Based on an eight-metric cardiovascular health score and areas of residence during the first nine years of life, the estimates reveal lower cardiovascular health scores for young adults in socioeconomically disadvantaged neighborhoods with large Hispanic and foreign-born populations, as well as those with a large Black segregated population. Surprisingly, the estimated decrements to the CVH scores for the two disadvantaged neighborhoods are generally similar to one another, despite the substantially higher levels of socioeconomic vulnerability in the Most Disadvantaged neighborhoods.Unadjusted models indicate that young adults spending all or even part of their first nine years in one of these two disadvantaged neighborhood archetypes have scores about five or more points (out of 100) below those who spend this time in advantaged neighborhoods. The lower CVH scores are partly accounted for by the racial/ethnic composition and education of the young adults. Young adults who move between these two types of disadvantaged neighborhoods during their childhood have the lowest scores among all the latent classes, suggesting potential selection of families that undertake these moves, disruption of healthy behaviors in the face of residential relocation, or further barriers to the adoption or maintenance of healthy behaviors in the new but still disadvantaged neighborhood.Consistent with our hypothesis, health-related behaviors, most notably physical activity, were drivers of the relationship between CVH and childhood neighborhood. Features that are thought to promote exercise, such as overall walkability, recreation facilities, parks and green spaces, bike lanes, and low perceived crime risk are more common in socioeconomically advantaged neighborhoods (Boone-Heinonen et al., 2011; Diez Roux, 2003; Yu & Lippert, 2016) and are likely to comprise one of the mechanisms linking neighborhoods to CVH. Unfortunately, many of these characteristics are difficult to measure and are not typically available from existing data, including the FFCWS. We explored several variables available from the 2000 Census potentially related to exercise and diet (e.g., the densities of recreational facilities, fast food outlets, and supermarkets), but the variables were poor proxies of respondents’ actual access to neighborhood amenities. Furthermore, the contextual variables pertaining to amenities did not differ significantly across the neighborhood archetypes identified in the LTA.Contrary to the cumulative disadvantage hypothesis, in the adjusted model, living in one of the disadvantaged neighborhood archetypes at both birth and at age nine was not significantly associated with lower CVH scores except for those who moved between the two disadvantaged archetypes. Nor was living in one of the disadvantaged neighborhood archetypes at birth consistently associated with significantly poorer CVH outcomes.We recognize that the absence of significant coefficients for most of the stayer and mover archetypes in adjusted models likely results in part from poor specification of neighborhoods. Our use of administrative boundaries to define neighborhoods makes it especially difficult to link specific neighborhood mechanisms such as exposures to violence, physical infrastructure, and collective efficacy (Galster, 2012) to CVH outcomes. Researchers, particularly those combining multiple data sources, typically use census or postal boundaries such as counties, tracts, and zip codes to define residential areas. While the standard geographical boundaries across surveys allow for data merging, these delineations rarely reflect the places people frequent. The reliance on administrative boundaries as proxies for neighborhoods is a limitation for almost all research on neighborhoods and CVH, likely leading to underestimates of neighborhood effects.Another potential limitation that may weaken our results is that our measurement of respondents' neighborhoods is temporally imprecise. The FFCWS recorded respondents’ residence locations at each interview but did not record any moves or their timing between interviews. Thus, we make no distinction between respondents who moved to a different neighborhood shortly after birth from respondents who moved a few years later. In addition, the contextual data are drawn from the 2000 Census and fail to capture changing characteristics of a given census tract or county.These limitations, along with the relatively small number of young adults who change neighborhood archetypes between birth and age nine, make it difficult to identify and estimate the salience of critical or sensitive periods of exposure – e.g., whether time spent in disadvantaged neighborhoods in infancy is potentially more important for CVH than time spent in later childhood. We also recognize that young adults may undergo additional moves in adolescence, a period not captured in this analysis.Lastly, similar to most studies on the effects of neighborhood on health, this study is an observational one. As such, it does not consider the selection of households into neighborhoods based on unobserved factors that may also influence health. Thus, in contrast to results from experimental studies, the findings do not permit direct causal inference on whether and how the neighborhood environment leads to the development of cardiovascular risk factors and cardiovascular disease (Gresham and Karatekin, 2025; Merlo et al., 2013; Oakes, 2004).Its limitations notwithstanding, this article points to early indicators of cardiovascular disease risk associated with living in disadvantaged neighborhoods during infancy and childhood. The associations with CVH identified in this analysis are primarily behavioral factors, but associations with clinical metrics of cardiovascular risk are likely to appear in the coming years and decades. Indeed, analysis of the carotid artery measurements in FF-CHAYA participants has revealed linkages between the CVH score and early cardiovascular disease, specifically indicators of early arterial injury and accelerated atherosclerosis (Lloyd-Jones et al., 2025b). The importance of CVH at young ages for subsequent health has been shown repeatedly. Data from several major surveys in the US have demonstrated that higher values of the CVH score in young adulthood are associated with better cardiometabolic health, lower rates of premature cardiovascular disease events, and lower mortality in adulthood (Laitinen et al., 2012; Perak et al., 2020; Walker et al., 2025). A recent study based on over 30,000 US participants in the Cardiovascular Lifetime Risk Pooling Project indicated that the risk of cardiovascular events decreased continuously as baseline CVH (LE8) scores increased, with the largest decline estimated for the youngest participants (20-39).The reduction in incidence of cardiovascular disease over a 10-year follow-up period in this age group was as large as 45 percent for a 10-point increase in the CVH score (Ning et al., 2024), supporting our expectation that the early signs of diverging health trajectories in the FF-CHAYA cohort are likely to intensify in later life.CRediT authorship contribution statementNoreen Goldman: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Project administration, Methodology, Funding acquisition, Formal analysis, Data curation, Conceptualization. Boriana Pratt: Writing – review & editing, Methodology, Formal analysis. Heeju Sohn: Writing – review & editing, Methodology, Conceptualization. Stephanie Enkel: Writing – review & editing, Investigation. Norrina Bai Allen: Writing – review & editing, Funding acquisition, Data curation. Hongyan Ning: Writing – review & editing, Project administration, Data curation. Donald Lloyd-Jones: Writing – review & editing, Project administration, Funding acquisition, Data curation. Daniel Notterman: Writing – review & editing, Project administration, Funding acquisition, Data curation.Ethical statementThis paper has not been previously published nor is it under consideration elsewhere. Moreover, it will not be published elsewhere if it is accepted at SSM-PH. All authors have made substantial contributions to the study design and/or the data acquisition and all have been involved in editing the manuscript. All authors have approved the final version of the paper.Declaration of competing interestsNothing to declare.